# Output File Formats and Descriptions

NIFty generates a number of output files depending on run mode:
1. `selected_features.tsv` when run in `find_features` mode, 
2. `trained_model_and_model_metadata.pkl` and `model_information.txt` when run in `train_model` mode, and
3. `predicted_classes.tsv` when run in `apply_model` mode.

Below are descriptions of each output file.

## `selected_features.tsv`

This file is a tab-separated file that contains information on the best *k* features generated and selected by NIFty. 
It includes the following columns of information:
* **Protein_Pair**: a tuple representation of the TSP rule/feature. A tuple `('P1','P2') ` represents the rule "P1 > P2".
* **Protein1**: the first measurement in the rule.
* **Protein2**: the second measurement in the rule.
* **Score**: the score associated with the rule. 
A score of 0.0 means that the rule has no association with either class and a scoer of 1.0 means that the rule is perfectly associated with one of the classes. 
The higher the score, the better a rule is likely to perform as a feature in a classifier.
* **P_Value**: the p-value calculated for the score based on a generated null distribution; uncorrected as the p-value is used as a ranking metric rather than an indicator of statistical significance.

### Example `selected_features.tsv` file:
| Protein_Pair        | Protein1 | Protein2 | Score | P_Value |
|---------------------|----------|----------|-------|---------|
| ('P1','P2')         | P1       | P2       | 1.00  | 0.0     |
| ('P3','P2')         | P3       | P2       | 0.88  | 0.0     |
| ('P4','P5')         | P4       | P5       | 0.88  | 0.0     |
| ('P6','P7')         | P6       | P7       | 0.85  | 0.0     |

*NOTE: When running NIFty with `find_features = false`, a version of this file is required as input, under the `feature_file` configuration key in the config file. 
The exact output, as seen above, is an acceptable input file. 
Alternatively, a simplified version of the file containing only the `Protein1` and `Protein2` columns from NIFty's output can also be used as input, as seen below:*

| Protein1 | Protein2 |
|----------|----------|
| P1       | P2       |
| P3       | P2       |
| P4       | P5       |
| P6       | P7       |

## `trained_model_and_model_metadata.pkl`

This file is a binary pickle file containing everything needed to apply a trained NIFty model to new data.

It includes:
* the trained model, 
* the Scikit-learn version the model was trained under, and 
* the named features used to train the model. 

*NOTE: When running NIFty with `train_model = false` and `apply_model = true`, this file is required as input, under the `model_file` configuration key in the config file. 
The exact file, as generated by NIFty, is the only accpetable input file.*

## `model_information.txt`
This file is a text file that provides a human-readable summary of the trained model's performance.
It includes:
1. Model Parameters:
All hyperparameters used to train the final classifier (e.g., number of trees, max depth, seed, etc.).
2. Cross-Validation Performance:
Mean and standard deviation for CV accuracy, precision, and recall during training.
3. Model Validation Performance:
Final performance metrics for the model when tested on the held-out validation dataset. 
**When reporting the accuracy, precision, or recall of your trained model, these are the metrics that should be reported (*not the CV results*).**

This file is meant for inspection and reporting — it does not contain the model itself.

## `predicted_classes.tsv`

This file is a tab-separated file that contains the class predictions generated by the trained model when applied to an unlabaled, experimental dataset. 

When NIFty is run with `prediction_format = "classes"`, it includes the following columns of information:
* **sample_id**: the unique sample ID associated with samples included in the input files.
* **classification_label**: the predicted class label for the sample.

When NIFty is run with `prediction_format = "probabilities"`, it includes the following columns of information:
* **sample_id**: the unique sample ID associated with samples included in the input files.
* **classification_probability_\<class1\>**: the esitmated probability that the sample belongs to \<class1\>.
* **classification_probability_\<class2\>**: the esitmated probability that the sample belongs to \<class2\>.

